[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
Women complain
that men don't hear them,
and men complain that women
don't give them space.
According to Arjuna Aradagh
and John Gray in their newest
book "Conscious Men," these
are legitimate complaints
because we're wired
totally differently.
It's all down to oxytocin
and testosterone.
And of course, a little
bit of re-education
helps, right?
[CHUCKLING] Welcome.
Arjuna, how did
you and John decide
to go into collaboration
to begin with?
>>ARJUNA ARDAGH:
Well, actually I've
known John Gray for more than 30
years, maybe close to 40 years.
We met when we
were both involved
with Transcendental Meditation
and Maharishi Mahesh Yogi.
John Gray was the secretary
to Maharishi Mahesh Yogi years
ago when I was still a teenager.
But we connected more recently.
We've been part of the
same men's group in Marin,
for Marin County, California,
for eight years now.
And it was really out of being
part of the same men's group.
I would stay at his
house sometimes.
We would get into talking
about our men's group,
then more broadly
about men in general.
And out of those
conversations-- I
would go to stay with him
because I lived too far
away to drive home afterwards.
I'd go stay with him, and we'd
have a cup of tea at 10:00 PM,
and we'd still be talking
at 2:30 in the night.
And the third time
this happened, we said,
why didn't we record this?
We're saying things that
have not been said before.
So that was how the whole
collaboration started.
>>REGINA: What do you what
is your men's group in Marin?
He's in Mill Valley, right?
>>ARDAGH: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
I used to live there.
I just love Mill Valley.
What is the men's
group dedicated to?
>>ARDAGH: Well, I
think any men's group--
[LAUGHING] It's a funny thing
to talk about to a woman,
actually, because it's--
any men's group, I think,
is really dedicated to an
opportunity for men to support
each other in an
environment that's just men.
And actually in our book
"Conscious Men," probably
the one recommendation
that we make in the book
that we feel would apply, would
be good for absolutely any man
at all, is to be part
of a men's group.
It's phenomenal.
Every week or two
weeks or every month
to spend a couple of
hours or three hours
where you're just in
a circle of men-- it's
amazing what happens.
It's the same for women.
When you actually get into
a single-gender environment
for a little while,
something really relaxes back
into a recognition
of-- [EXHALES]--
this is what the masculine
is like when it's not
in relationship to the feminine.
It's very, very
important for men
to have that, particular today
when we've got so much blending
of gender roles, which is a
good thing, that all of us
get to explore our masculine
and feminine side more than we
did in previous generations.
But it's actually a really
good thing now and then
to have a break and
just be men together.
>>REGINA: You know, it's funny.
I had dinner with
someone last night
who is struggling in terms
of making a living at exactly
this, at trying to
help men go deeper
into themselves and for
men to gather together
and getting men to
even gather together.
And he's been at this
for years and years.
And I told him I'd be
interviewing you today,
and he said, what's
interesting is
to me that that's
not in their nature,
joining together in a group.
I don't know any men where
that's in their nature.
It's something that would be a
conscious choice that they're
doing for purpose.
And so it's almost like kind of
swimming upstream, so to speak.
>>ARDAGH: That's a very
interesting point, Regina.
And I think I would want to
slightly edit what you said.
>>REGINA: Sure.
>>ARDAGH: I'd say
it's definitely very
much not in our conditioning.
Whether it's in our nature
or not is a different thing.
And it's interesting
the conditioning,
because when men put energy
into being with other men,
it means they're putting value
on bonding with other men.
Now, what's the message
we got from our fathers
and forefathers about
making relationship
with other men primary?
We were conditioned with
homophobia, basically, right?
I mean, it's hard
to believe, but I
think until 1965, which
was within my lifetime,
homosexuality was illegal
in England, right?
It was only legalized--
>>REGINA: Yet practiced widely.
>>ARDAGH: Now, of course,
many marry other men.
But for the first
seven years of my life
or eight years of my life,
I was told that for a man
to love another man is illegal.
You can go to prison for it.
And then if we get into
kind of immoral and not
fit in the eyes of God, I mean,
we're way, way over the edge
there.
So we grew up to believe
that getting too close
to another man was dangerous.
And that's a conditioning that
many of us, we have to reverse.
And we have to recognize
that of course as men there's
a tremendous nourishment and
value to bonding with a woman
and, maybe if you're
heterosexual to being married.
There's a tremendous value
to being a father, bonding
with your children.
There's a tremendous value
to creating good teamwork
with other coworkers.
But actually putting value,
putting value on relationship
with another man or
other men, that's
something we have to
decondition ourselves
to be able to see as important.
>>REGINA: Yes, exactly.
And I agree with that,
as someone observing
from the outside, obviously,
and also the hypocrisy
and what that created by
way of cognitive disconnect
with in England, for
example, with boys
in public-- "public" meaning
private in our parlance--
school, where
homosexuality was common.
Even if you weren't-- you didn't
have to be homosexual to have
a sexual experience with another
boy or a teacher or your music
teacher, whomever.
And I know with a lot
of boys that created
a lot of damage and confusion.
>>ARDAGH: Yeah, well, it
was commonly practiced
but not in any sense condoned.
>>REGINA: No.
No.
>>ARDAGH: So it
was something that
happened with a tremendous
amount of guilt and shame
and tension.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
And that created
a lot of problems.
And then yet at
the same time, when
you talk to men, older
men, for example--
I notice my dad's generation--
what were the great years?
And they'd be like, well,
World War II or the Korean War,
where men had to--
>>ARDAGH: --bond with other men.
>>REGINA: --practice courage
and reliance upon one another.
Those were the great
moments in life.
But to get together in a
group and talk about things
is a whole different thing.
>>ARDAGH: Well, this is
a really important point
that you're focusing on here.
It's probably one of
the strongest reasons
to write this book, is that most
of us as men, we kind of need
a rethink on this.
We need to become conscious,
anyway, of our needs
and realize that bonding deeply
with other men for the sake
of bonding deeply with
other men is actually
a need that men have.
And if they fulfill
that need, they
become deeper, more
accountable, happier men.
Now, the little
illustration we give
in the book about this,
which I think really kind of
shines a light on
it, most men, if they
were having a conflict or
difficulty in marriage,
would not hesitate to go
for counseling, right?
Most men, if they had a
challenge with a teenage child,
wouldn't hesitate to
go for counseling.
If you had a challenge
with a coworker,
you would see mediation
as appropriate.
But it's very rare for a man to
have conflict with another man
and to be willing to get help to
resolve it or to go to therapy
because you're having a
problem your best friend.
You wouldn't do that.
It would be weird.
A woman, on the other hand,
might be willing to do that.
But you see, that's
because we're
so deeply conditioned
to not value
our friendships with other men.
And actually, that's a
really pivotal, pivotal thing
in being able to
grow, because a man
needs the challenge and
the support of other men
to be able to fully blossom.
He's not going to be able
to get that from his wife
or from a woman.
>>REGINA: Right.
And you bring up in the
book that in the past,
men's status in society,
their heroism, so to speak,
came from unconscious patterns,
where you were inducted
into the military,
for example, you
were following in your
father's footsteps
as a blacksmith in your work.
And your life was
defined for you,
but it was never a
conscious choice.
And this was a
really good point.
I mean, it struck
me that now that we
have the possibility
of conscious choice,
it requires men to become
completely conscious
in a different way.
>>ARDAGH: Right.
I'm just having a little
bit of a shock here
because it's unusual for
me to do an interview
where someone's read the
book this thoroughly.
It's like, wow,
you've read the book.
>>REGINA: Oh, yes.
>>ARDAGH: So many interviewers,
they've skimmed it.
>>REGINA: I always do.
>>ARDAGH: But you've
really gone through deeply.
That's very nice.
Thank you.
Yeah, you're making
a good point.
One thing we
distinguish in the book
is there are different,
you could say,
dispositions of masculinity
that we see today.
And if it's OK with you, I'm
going to just briefly label
four of them, because
it will illustrate what
conscious masculinity means.
So one disposition, which
is still very prevalent,
is to run on the automatic
conditioning that's been there
for thousands of years.
That means a man's enduring.
He doesn't feel his feelings.
Relationship is not
very important to him.
He's probably somewhat
absent as a father.
He just gets the job done
and doesn't look back.
And even though probably in
New York or San Francisco
or something, that
may seem very dated,
in many parts of the country,
many parts of the world,
that is still very much alive,
the old traditional macho,
masked man who probably
disdains feminism and women
having more empowerment.
He doesn't like that.
So that's one disposition
of masculine, which
is purely conditioned, right?
Now, there is also another
kind of disposition,
which I would say is equally
to some degree conditioned,
which is a reflex reaction to
that, which we in the book,
we call it the
feminization of men, OK?
And that's a man who realizes
that all of that conditioning,
that macho masculinity,
was an imprisonment
and, therefore, overreacts
by going the other way.
He goes really
into his feelings.
He just follows what
intuitively feels right to him.
He ceases to be accountable.
He becomes very empathetic.
And the primary problem that
we see with that-- I mean,
there are many problems, but the
primary problem that men come
to John or me for counseling
for or for support--
is that the polarity, the
sexual polarity with women
just goes out the window.
>>REGINA: It's not there.
>>ARDAGH: Women are not
attracted to a feminized man,
right?
So even though there are some
good things about a man being
in touch with his feelings,
too much feminization,
that's one problem,
is in relationship,
but also a man loses his edge.
He loses his sense of direction.
If a man is too much
influenced by feeling and not
enough by keeping his word,
he gets lost and confused
and uncented.
There is now a third-- I'm
going to give you four.
The third disposition is what we
could call learned masculinity
or imitated masculinity.
And that's another, I would
say, another problem, actually,
is men read books
about how to be
a better man or a superior man
or a better man or something.
They read a book and go,
oh, I should be like this.
And so they learn,
OK, I'm here, and I'm
really present with you.
But it's kind of somewhat
serious and studied
and imitated.
>>REGINA: It's not embodied.
>>ARDAGH: Well, it's certainly--
there's a lot of effort in it.
And what I think
we've discovered
is you just have to
poke a man a little bit
who's got this sort of imitated
masculinity, and it crumbles.
There's no humor in
it, and it's not really
authentic or natural flowing.
It's imitated.
It may be a good
phase to go through.
And then the fourth
kind of masculinity
that we talk about,
which John and I-- I
don't think we would want
to have the arrogance
to say that we are
examples of this
any more than anybody else, but
we're good at expressing ideas.
We're articulate wordsmiths.
We write books.
So we want to give
voice to something,
which is the possibility of a
man becoming familiar enough
with his biology,
with his conditioning,
to understand his conditioning,
a deep enough sense
of his intuition,
of his potential
that his masculinity
becomes conscious.
Instead of some
kind of conditioned
traditional masculine
or reaction to it
or studied masculinity
from a book,
he actually reconnects
with himself, sometimes
through a retreat or
solitude, and he realizes,
I'm here for a few
decades on this planet,
and this is the
kind of gift that I
want to give as a father,
as a partner, as a leader.
This is the way that
I want to show up.
And that would be conscious.
And that doesn't need to show
up in any particular way.
What we aim to do with our
book is not to provide answers,
but to provide questions, not
to tell a man how he should be
or there's any formula,
but to be able to ask,
what kind of man
do you want to be?
What's the kind of masculinity
you can live so that one day
when you die, you can go,
ah, yes, I gave fully.
And I think in a
way-- and here I
am walking that
edge of arrogance,
but I'll give it a shot.
I think that's in a
way what motivated
John and myself to
write this book,
that somehow we've
both just fallen
into a masculinity-- it's
different for both of us,
but we've fallen into a
masculinity for each of us
where we feel comfortable
with our own skin.
We both, I think, feel
that we could die one day
and feel that we lived
the way we chose to live.
It wasn't either
condition or a reaction.
And that's something we'd like
to pass on to other people.
>>REGINA: Well, and it's
interesting generationally
speaking, because you're
of a particular generation
where it's really maybe
the first generation where
real conscious choice was
made and possible at large,
as opposed to our parents'
generation, which were still
kind of running on the
programs of what was expected,
and you didn't explore these
subjects often en masse, right?
Now let's take a look
at what's happening
with the 20-something males.
And I just had this
conversation, in fact,
in California a couple
days ago with someone,
saying their sons are
failing to launch.
Most of them are college
educated-- not all.
They tend to move back home,
play video games, smoke weed.
It's like girls are
way too complex.
They're just too
much of a hassle.
They don't want to engage.
And so maybe we'll get
to this subject, too.
Maybe it's artificial
constructs, porn and so forth.
And this is a
generation of young men
who are not standing
up to purpose.
Now they're very young still,
so they have time to grow.
But there doesn't seem to be
any motivation toward that
at this time.
>>ARDAGH: Right.
So interesting
question-- John and I,
although we are both baby
boomers, I can say for myself,
my clients, the people I choose
to work with in coaching,
are very much from that
millennial generation,
20s, early 30s.
So I do experience a lot of
what you're talking about.
And I think what we're
seeing in that generation,
the millennials, is parents who
were baby boomers, who didn't
want to pass on
to their children
the rigidity and the
strict boundaries
that we had imposed on us.
And so we overreact, and
we become very permissive.
Now here's the thing.
For a girl, a teenage
girl, being encouraged
to feel and to be intuitive
and to follow her instinct
is actually encouraging
her femininity.
That's a good thing.
For a young man, we don't
want to throw the baby out
with the bathwater, right?
So we certainly, I
think, want to be
more aware of this gender
stereotyping that a lot of us
suffered from, but
at the same time,
there is understanding
about male biology that
goes back thousands of
years in many traditions.
We don't reject all
of that out of hand.
Because there have traditionally
been rites of passage
for young men, which
usually involve
the awakening, the
cultivation of a quality
of endurance, enduring
challenge, enduring difficulty.
>>REGINA: Courage?
>>ARDAGH: Yeah, that's
another element.
>>REGINA: That's
part of it, yeah.
>>ARDAGH: Another
element, but I'm
going to focus right now
specifically on endurance.
Endurance means-- and endurace,
endure-- it's from Latin.
It means to make
strong, to make hard.
It's actually how
you make metal hard.
And it's interesting.
>>REGINA: Dure.
Mhm.
>>ARDAGH: Durus
is the Latin word.
And it's interesting that
we're talking about masculine,
we're talking about hard.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>ARDAGH: Yeah.
So how does a man
become hard, strong?
Well, obviously physically
he lifts weights, right?
He does physical things, so his
muscles become hard, not soft.
But in the same way, a young
man learns how to keep his word,
to be true, to move through
things to a goal, which is
what testosterone is all about.
He learns how to
do that by going
through difficult
challenges and coming
out victorious on
the other side.
If the challenge is
too easy, it doesn't
make him sufficiently strong.
If the challenge is to
difficult, it conditions
him to failure.
So it's the right
level of challenge.
And that has been the
essence of a rite of passage,
which has been there in many
traditions in different ways,
see.
Now, when we're
missing that now.
A friend of ours, John and
mine, a friend of ours Warren
Farrell, he and John has written
a book called "The Boy Crisis."
And it's about the
fact that we don't
have-- 50% of young
men growing up
don't have a father
present in the house--
extraordinary statistic, right?
So I do meet a lot of
young men like this.
And actually the key that
I've discovered-- I'm
really excited to
share this with you,
because you were asking about
young millennial young men.
The key, actually,
is to understand
the cycle, the biological
cycle, of how testosterone
and dopamine and
serotonin work together.
So this is how it
works very simply.
This does not apply
until puberty,
but once a man
comes into puberty--
and it's going to build up
between 13, 14 and about 25.
During that period, a
young man needs to learn--
and it's not
necessarily instinctive.
It has to be trained.
A young man needs to
learn how to make promises
that he is somehow able to
keep with a little edge.
If it doesn't
require little edge,
it's not going to do
anything-- with a little bit
of push-through, a
promise he can keep.
Now, what happens when a
young man, or any age of man,
makes a promise and keeps it?
The testosterone
required to push through
and to check something
off in a box--
it's a very important
thing for men,
is checking things
off on boxes, right?
Not so much for women,
and if a woman does that,
she's going into her masculine.
But when a man goes check,
actually his testosterone
depletion or release
of testosterone
switches momentarily
into dopamine,
and he feels psychologically
he has earned the right
to rest and relax.
So depending upon the magnitude
of the task, if a man like
actually types the last
period on a book he's writing,
it's like massive
dopamine release.
So then he actually
feels he has the right
to be still, to relax.
And that earned right releases
dopamine into the brain,
together with some serotonin,
but it's mostly about dopamine.
And that particular biological
environment of dopamine
is the precursor to the
replenishment of testosterone,
to replenishing
testosterone reserves.
Now, the replenishment
of the reserve
actually means that he's got
fresh testosterone in his blood
to be able to take on a slightly
bigger challenge the next day,
which means now he can push
through, keep his word,
do what he said.
He'll get an even bigger
dopamine response,
he feels even better
about himself,
and that cycle is how a man
builds confidence and builds
the motivation to
want to do things.
And that's what
breaks that thing
about wanting to go back
to live with your parents
and smoke weed and
play video games.
That instinct is because a young
man has lost that feeling of,
I can do this.
He's actually trained himself
to feel, I can't do this.
But if a man trains himself
or is trained through hell to,
yes, I did it, I
broke through, he's
going to wake up early the
next morning eager to do
another one.
And actually, that's how
I trained my two boys.
I've got a son of
23 and a son of 20.
And thanks be to God, they
don't have any of that.
My youngest son left
home at 17 because he
was motivated to-- he's
got a dog, he's got a car,
he lives now in Truckee.
He's the top ski
coach for the ski team
at North Star, which is a
great accomplishment at 20.
>>REGINA: Yes, it
is, absolutely.
>>ARDAGH: He's coaching
the national team.
And he's all about that.
He's like, yes, I could do it.
And now he's always
looking for new challenges.
I've done this,
now I can do that.
>>REGINA: Because that cascade
of chemicals is in itself--
I don't want to use the word
addictive, but it is addictive.
>>ARDAGH: Exactly.
Now, what I did with my
boys-- and I don't know.
I didn't have a
father present for me.
So I had to really make
it up as I went along.
But what I did with my
boys is I really operated
throughout their
childhood and adolescence
that there was no free lunch--
no free lunch in my house,
right?
Which meant basically
that I bought
them birthday presents
and Christmas presents,
but everything else--
and I provided then
food and a roof and heating.
But everything else
they had to earn.
But I was paying
them to do things
at a ridiculous
rate for their age.
So if we were going to build
a deck, my little son of six
would be holding the bucket of
nails and passing me the nails.
He's getting $15 an hour to
hold the nail bucket, right?
And then I told him,
if you save the money,
if you put the money
into an account save it
until you're ready
to buy a bigger item
and don't fritter
it, I'll double it.
So my kids were
buying their own--
what's that thing
called that you-- I
forget what it's called.
>>REGINA: A little Gameboy.
>>ARDAGH: Gameboy--
they were buying
that with their own money.
They bought their own computers.
They bought everything
from money they saved.
Now, they complained bitterly
in their teenage years and said,
my friends' parents--
my friends don't have
to pay for their cell phone.
The parents provide it.
My parents provide
all these things.
I said, yeah, but your parents
don't pay their children
to take the garbage out, right?
They have to do it anyway.
So it's a different
system in my house.
Well, I don't like your system!
I said, well, tough, because
this is who you're living with.
But I just stayed with
it, and I said basically
there's no free lunch.
You earn everything.
Well, my kids have grown up
to not expect free lunch.
And so now, as I said,
they're 20 and 23.
Neither one of them have
asked me for money for years.
In fact, if we out to dinner,
they take pride in paying.
Dad, look, we'll
treat you for dinner.
Because they're both
earning, you see.
So it's really worked out.
And that was just
guesswork on my part,
because I didn't have
any role model myself.
My father left when I was little
and wasn't much in my life.
But this has just
worked out well.
And I think it's something
I would recommend to anybody
raising boys, basically.
It even works well with
girls, but raising boys,
you can actually
provide that training,
and then they feel
good about themselves.
Both my sons have
extraordinarily high
self-esteem.
They just have
this, I can do this.
And it's not so much arrogance.
It's just a feeling of, that's
not a challenge; I can do it.
>>REGINA: Yeah, but they've
been proving it to themselves
over and over
throughout their lives.
>>ARDAGH: Exactly.
That's the key.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>ARDAGH: That's the key,
is when a man accomplishes
something and checks
it off, yes, he's
more accountable
to other people,
but what's much more important
is that a man can trust himself
more.
And I think that is the key.
>>REGINA: And that
now we're going
to get into the
dynamic with women,
because the book is written as
much for women, if not more.
And that's key, because if a
man stays true to their word
and is 100% in that,
that's the only way
women are ever going to relax
around them and really trust
them.
>>ARDAGH: Well, it's
interesting you pick up
on the piece about
100% accountable,
because I've got to make
a little disclosure here.
In the book we talk
about 12 qualities
of conscious masculinity.
And this thing about
keeping the word,
that's like the weakest
for me, personally.
I mean, I do not
have any credibility
to write about that.
It's like it's a very
difficult area for me,
so I know about the challenges
of that, of following through.
I tend to just overcommit.
I tend to promise
completely unrealistically.
>>REGINA: So you set yourself
up to break your word.
>>ARDAGH: Exactly, exactly.
So I've found ways to handle it.
And I think that's
an important piece
about this book,
is we absolutely
don't want to write a book,
either for men to read
or for women to read, which
paints a picture of how
a man should be, like
this is the perfect man
and anything else is--
>>REGINA: Right.
>>ARDAGH: Because neither
John nor I would measure up
to all 12 of these.
What we aim to do
in this book is
to say, we would like to be
able to pass on what we know so
that a man can feel
good about himself
and so that the
people in his life,
primarily if he's in a
relationship with a woman so
the woman in his life,
but also his children,
can also feel that they
are benefited by him,
that they are nourished by him,
that it's a gift to have him
in their lives, right?
So what we've done,
actually, in the book
is we've determined 12 qualities
of conscious masculinity.
There's probably
not a single man
on the planet, including me
and John, who perfectly--
>>REGINA: Who possess
all of them, of course.
>>ARDAGH: Exactly, who
perfectly embody all of them.
>>REGINA: I was
just interjecting
that because that's
personal to me.
I was raised by a man who
was kind and gentle and--
>>ARDAGH: Your father.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Purposeful, never
broke his word.
And so that's what I
became conditioned to
and was quite shocked when
I went out in the world
and realized people break
their word all the time.
I have a real problem with that.
And so maybe that's just a
personal thing, because that's
what allows me to just
kind of relax a bit,
is if I know someone's
good for their word.
And I'm totally unsettled
if they're not right.
Although that's only one trait,
and maybe for other women
it's not so important.
>>ARDAGH: Exactly.
I think a very important
thing in reading
this book is to realize nobody's
going to be 100% on everything.
>>REGINA: Sure.
>>ARDAGH: The key is
mindfulness, really,
is to be able to
recognize, OK, I'm a man,
and here are some qualities.
Some of them may not be
important to me at all,
so that's freedom.
But here are some qualities
that we've determined cause men
to feel good about themselves,
but also cause women
to be attracted to men as well.
So how am I doing in
these 12 qualities?
And would I like support
with some of them?
If you'd like support, if
a man would like support
in any of these
qualities-- there
are 12 of them--
the book provides
a tons of practical tools for
how to cultivate that quality.
>>REGINA: Yes, it does.
And even, for example,
on this one quality
we're talking about, standing
by your word, if someone were
to screw up in that way and
whatever, it didn't work out,
to just be aware of it,
conscious of it, address it
and say, I'm really sorry that
I wasn't unable to do that, this
and this and this
happened, so at least you
know it's being addressed
and not just shuffled
away somewhere,
swept under the rug,
to consciously face things
that don't go well, too.
This is a really big deal.
And instead of feeling,
oh, God, if I even
say anything about it,
she's going to rag on me,
and being afraid to address
things when they don't go well.
But OK, so getting into
the female part of it--
>>ARDAGH: Let's just pick
up on one thing you said,
which will be a good segue
into the female part,
because you said, "Oh, I
shouldn't bring this up.
She'll rag on me."
And actually, that
might possibly
be an intelligent thing
to think for a woman.
And this will be a
good segue into talking
about men and women.
There are mistakes
that I make in my life.
I have what I consider to be
a really good relationship
with my wife Chameli.
We're 14 years into a very
engaging and rich and not
boring and fulfilling union,
where we have a lot of freedom
to do what we want
to do in our lives,
but we know that
we're absolutely there
for each other.
And actually, I make mistakes
in my life all the time.
And I'm playing a
fairly big playing field
with running a coaching
school internationally.
And I make mistakes.
But actually, I've
learned it's probably best
not to go to her as my first
resource in needing support.
>>REGINA: Oh, I agree with that.
I'm just saying if
you screw up, it's
good to just address it face on.
That's all.
>>ARDAGH: What I do--
it's a good segue.
What I'll do is I'll
go to her and say,
I'm facing this
challenge right now,
or I'm sorry I
didn't do this thing,
and I'm handling it with someone
who can really support me.
But I've kind of learned
to bring to my wife
my strength, my gift, not to go
to her wanting help or support.
I go to a man friend or
to my men's group when
I need support, or I'll go
to a paid coach or a paid
consultant.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
I think there's
wisdom in that, yes.
OK, so you were
talking about lists
and how men tick off the list.
And they have an
increase in testosterone
and all of this chemical
cascade to encourage
even more-- if you want to
call that responsible behavior
in the future, where if I see
a list, for example, if I have
a long list of
things to do, I find
it overwhelming and depressing.
And so I'll get to
it, I'll get to it,
but it's like blah, like
this, until it's over with.
It's a completely
opposite response.
And let's talk about what
happened in two stories
that you put in your book.
One is John going to
Norway on a TV show.
And I think it was the
prime minister there
he was speaking with
or something like that.
>>ARDAGH: Yeah, I forget.
It was the prime minister, and
it was two senior government
officials.
>>REGINA: Yeah, basically
saying there's no difference.
Men and women are
completely equal.
There's no difference
between the two.
And then a study
comes out in Sweden
saying women are four times more
stressed out in the workforce
than men are.
>>ARDAGH: OK, I must admit
that was something happened
with John, but yeah,
I mean what he's
focusing on there is the
idea of gender neutrality.
And it's legitimate.
I mean, it's a well-founded idea
that in previous generations
there's been such a
stereotype, and you're a boy,
you should be like this; you're
a girl, you should be like this
and wear a pink dress
and pink-- And then,
of course, the corollary to
that is, if you're a boy,
you've got to go to war,
you've got to endure,
you've got to work
long hours, there's
no pleasure for you, young man.
And if you're a girl, oh, you're
going to stay in the kitchen,
but you don't get to
express your creativity.
Well, obviously we
don't want that, right?
And then of course
part of that--
>>REGINA: But to say
there's no difference
is an extreme overreaction.
>>ARDAGH: Well, I believe so.
Now, not everybody believes so.
But I believe that
it's an overreaction
because it's true that
there are many stereotypes.
Like we used to say
women couldn't vote.
Well, obviously now that's
ridiculous, we realize.
I mean, nobody in
their right mind--
>>REGINA: Yeah, we didn't
possess the intelligence.
>>ARDAGH: Exactly.
Nobody in their right mind
would suggest that today.
And then in the '70s,
women claimed their right
to be doctors and lawyers
and prime minister.
All of that was thought
to be inappropriate.
Now we've realized women
can do just as good a job
at all those things,
often better, right?
So we've realized a lot of
that stereotyping was bogus.
But here's the thing, OK?
A man has testicles.
He's producing testosterone.
He ejaculates semen.
A woman has a menstrual cycle.
She's capable of bearing a baby.
She has more
estrogen in her body.
She's got ovaries.
We can't say all those things
are a social construct.
These physical differences,
those are real, right?
>>REGINA: Well, Yes.
>>ARDAGH: And because there
are physical differences,
there are also
hormonal differences,
which cause a difference in
the way you respond to life.
And those are real differences.
>>REGINA: And this is peppered
throughout the whole book,
that we do respond
very differently.
As you say, men need that
down time, the alone time,
maybe talk with a
friend, just to get out
of this fear of what's going
on in their relationship
when things are challenged.
Just don't chase them
down the hallway.
And furthermore,
just let them go
so they can process and
come back to center.
Where women are going
to call up a girlfriend
or something and their sister.
They want to collaborate.
They want to download all this
until their nervous system
starts calming down in
that that's very typical.
It's been throughout
history that way.
>>ARDAGH: Right.
So that's a hormonal
thing, you see.
When a woman is stressed
out and overwhelmed
and she calls someone
on the phone or talks
to a friend, particularly a
girlfriend, within 20 minutes
there's going to be
a surge in oxytocin.
>>REGINA: Rate, connection and--
>>ARDAGH: Yeah.
Oxytocin neutralizes the
adrenaline, cortisol,
which was stress,
and she actually
feels connected
with herself again.
She learns to trust
herself again.
She knows she can make
the right decision.
That does not happen for a man.
The man has got a spike in
cortisol and adrenaline.
Talking to somebody
else is going
to make him more confused.
He's gonna just-- blah-- he's
gonna to be spinning more.
What he needs is withdraw.
What we know now is that a man
has a much greater capacity
to make the world go
away than a woman does.
When a man-- if he just closes
the door, shuts everything out,
even if it's to watch
a football game,
if he just shuts
everything out, he
can forget his
troubles very quickly.
That causes dopamine to
be released in the brain.
Dopamine, serotonin causes
the neutralization of stress.
Then he comes out, and
he's more centered.
It's not so much
he's now following
his intuition or
his heart, but he's
like, I know the
right thing to do.
He feels a renewed capacity to
keep his word no matter what.
And then he feels
good about himself.
>>REGINA: Right.
OK, so then again how
people process stress,
like that study
in Sweden showed--
I was chatting with a girl the
other day who's in med school.
She's going to be a surgeon.
She said, ah-- she's Hungarian.
(HUNGARIAN ACCENT)
Yeah, I just read
a study that says
female surgeons
lower their lifespan by 10
additional years to men.
And I said, makes
perfect sense to me.
By the way, I'm
reading this book.
I was just reading
this-- I was reading
the book at the same
time, not at that moment,
but I had been
earlier in the day.
And I thought, it
makes perfect sense.
It's a completely
different way to process
that very focused kind of
stress that a surgeon would have
to go through, which can be
extremely depleting for women
and can actually be
energizing in a way for men.
>>ARDAGH: Well, what
I would suggest,
and I'm just guessing here--
>>REGINA: She decided maybe
she should go into dermatology.
[LAUGHING] I thought
it was funny.
>>ARDAGH: I think what would
be interesting to find out,
if a woman became a
surgeon but was actually
trained in a school where
all the teachers were women
and then went into
a hospital where
it was women who had
set up the thing,
I doubt that
statistic would apply.
>>REGINA: That may
be, because she's
trying to squeeze into
a male-dominated world.
>>ARDAGH: Exactly.
Now that's the key point that
applies to so many women today.
>>REGINA: Yes, absolutely.
>>ARDAGH: As a woman,
she's legitimate,
I would say, in wanting
to be a doctor or the CEO
or a prime minister or whatever.
>>REGINA: And capable.
>>ARDAGH: She's capable.
But she's trying to fit
into a world that was set up
to run on testosterone,
which means it was set up
to run on push through, push
through, push through, push
through, score a goal
and you can relax.
That doesn't work
well for women.
Now, right here-- we're
sitting in Boulder today.
Right here in this
same area where we are
there's a publishing company
called Sounds True founded
by Tammy Simon.
That's a really good
example of a company, which
was founded by a
woman, not entirely
but mostly run by
women, and it's
an environment that's
really comfortable for women
to thrive in.
Women can bring
their dogs into work,
bring their children into work.
It's an environment where
women don't get stressed
because it's a publishing
company set up from the get-go
not run on--
>>REGINA: And to
establish community
instead of competition.
>>ARDAGH: Exactly.
Now we're seeing that happening
more and more and more as women
are integrated
into the workplace.
It's taken a while to catch up.
Just in the last
10 years, as women
are integrated
into the workplace,
we're seeing gyms at
work, childcare at work,
all these things that
are about well-being.
Not everyone's going
to agree with this,
but in my opinion,
that suggestion
that we take care of ourselves
well to get the job done,
I don't think that comes
from the masculine.
>>REGINA: No.
>>ARDAGH: The masculine's
like, never mind the gym.
Let's just get the job done.
We'll just skip lunch.
We'll just push through
til midnight, you see.
>>REGINA: [LAUGHING] Exactly.
>>ARDAGH: It's the feminine,
not necessarily women,
but the feminine
energy that realizes
the importance of nurturing.
>>REGINA: Yes, I
agree with that.
Let's talk about men and
their defined purpose.
And we spoke about
this a little before.
If men do not find
their purpose,
it can be a very untethered
and confusing reality.
And then the overlay of making
an income or money, which
as you say in your
book is almost always
secondary to the
purpose if a man is
really conscious and balanced.
>>ARDAGH: Well, I think
it ideally should be.
It very rarely is like that.
>>REGINA: Right.
It should be, yeah.
>>ARDAGH: But
ideally, a man finds
his way of giving his
gift in the world.
That's actually the way
we're talking about it.
That's not so much about
choosing the right job.
I was talking to somebody
yesterday, a coaching client,
and he said he went
to technical school
and looked down the list to find
which is the one that's right
for me.
And of course, none of
them felt right for him,
because your gift that
you were born to give,
it's not like to be a
software engineer or a--
>>REGINA: It's not
necessarily career-related.
>>ARDAGH: Exactly.
A man's gift is
his sense of doing
the right thing, a
sense of like, ah,
I came here to serve
in a particular way
and to find the
expression of that,
Now, that's just a matter
of being true to himself.
I actually was talking
to one of my clients
yesterday, who said he
felt he had kind of lost
his gift or his mission because
he was taking a lot of time
now to look after
his father, who
has Alzheimer's, and his mother,
who is struggling as well.
They're both in their 90s.
So he felt, oh,
well, I've kind of
abandoned by mission to really
be there for my parents.
I said, well, let me
ask you a question,
because if you did not
take care of your parents,
would you feel like
you were really
being the man you could be?
He said, no, I'd
really regret it.
And I said, OK, so--
there's a phrase
we use in the book of
"do the right thing."
We put that in capital letters.
"Do the right thing" is
a kind of a definition
of a man on purpose.
He's doing the right thing.
So I said, do you feel that
looking after your parents
at this point in your life
is doing the right thing?
He said, absolutely.
I said, well, then looking after
your parents is your mission.
That is your purpose right now.
It's not exclusively
your purpose.
You've got other
work you do as well,
but it's part of living your
purpose and your mission.
I spent years as
a single father,
living just me and
my two boys together.
And I put tons of time into
cooking all of their food
from original ingredients.
I didn't buy anything
out of a package.
I spent tons of time
going for bike rides,
showing up for every
basketball game.
I was completely
living my purpose.
But it wasn't a course
from a university.
It was doing the thing
that I was born to do.
And that's what we mean
by mission and purpose.
And really, there isn't a
formula that you can apply.
You know that you're living
your purpose because it's
effortless, it's easy, and
you go to bed at night feeling
like, yes, I'm living on target.
I'm living on purpose.
And that's something
that I think
coaching is incredibly helpful
for, to have a peer who's not
meeting you, talking
down to you as a teacher,
but meeting you as
a man on the level.
I know your challenges, brother,
and I can support you in this.
Having somebody who
can support you,
intuitively feeling into
the right direction,
and then slowly building on
that, incredibly helpful.
And you can usually
get a man back
on track in one or two months.
>>REGINA: Mm.
Let's talk about
the money equation,
because so many men equate
their value with their income,
and, A, what this
does, and also,
some of the facts you put
in the book, which I thought
were interesting, that if you're
on the lower socioeconomic end
of the scale and you
have, say, a boost
of $5,000, $10,000 a year
in your salary, that's
a big boost and a feeling of
well-being, an accomplishment.
And then up to $100,000 a year
is-- I think that was the--
>>ARDAGH: That's where
the bell-curve levels off.
>>REGINA: That's where
it starts leveling off,
that your knees are
met at $100,000 a year.
By the time you get into the
range of $200,000 to $300,000
a year--
>>ARDAGH: It drops off.
>>REGINA: It drops off,
satisfaction in life.
Everything starts dropping off.
Happiness drops off.
>>ARDAGH: Yeah, very
shocking statistic.
Actually, that research
was done by Martin Seligman
at the center of a
positive psychology
in I think it's Penn State or
University of Pennsylvania.
>>REGINA: Very interesting.
>>ARDAGH: Yeah.
So the sense of a
positive psychology,
they've developed a 22-point
measurement of well-being.
It includes proclivity
towards addiction,
relationship with
children, how quickly you
get divorced, all these things,
so 22 fairly good measurement
of well-being, right?
And so they found this thing
that if your income goes up
from $25,000 to $30,000
a year, you will
see an increase of well-being.
It levels off, as you said.
It levels off for quite
a while where money
makes no difference anymore.
But then the shocking thing
is that very wealthy people,
the more money they
make, on average the more
their well-being goes down.
You've probably seen
this thing about people
who win the lottery.
Now, there was actually
a class-action lawsuit
a few years ago in
California where
a bunch of lottery winners
gathered together and tried
to sue the government for
having won the lottery.
Because they said it
damaged their life so badly.
>>REGINA: I know.
That was crazy.
But I understand.
>>ARDAGH: It damaged
their lives so badly,
because actually
having loads of money
is not real-- it's a
completely false goal.
It doesn't actually
give you anything.
I mean--
>>REGINA: It's
truly fool's gold.
>>ARDAGH: It's fool's gold.
Now, this is a shocking idea.
If you think about
how we've been raised,
you go to the
supermarket, what do you
see-- I mean, it's maybe
changing a little bit now,
but what do you see
at the cash register?
All these pictures of
people who are "successful."
And what does success mean?
A lot of money or a lot
of power or a lot of fame,
none of which give
you any value at all.
There's been a lot of people
who have come out recently,
people like Russell Brand--
>>REGINA: I was going to
get to that point next.
>>ARDAGH: Sean Penn, Brad Pitt--
these are all people recently
who have come out and said,
it was all a ladder pointing
against the wrong wall.
Fame and money and
power doesn't give you
any nourishment at all.
And those three actors,
interestingly they've
all turned their energy toward
social and political action
as a result, making
a difference,
contributing in a positive way.
>>REGINA: Yes.
OK, let's talk about
and get into sexuality,
because the whole notion
of the chemicals that
are needed and
created, and we'll
get toward the end of that
part of the conversation
and what it takes to
bring polarity back
in familiar circumstance.
>>ARDAGH: Do you
think before we do
that I could just put
one tiny footnote on that
about the money thing?
>>REGINA: Sure.
Yeah.
>>ARDAGH: Because that
doesn't mean that we
want to worship poverty.
We don't want to go into some
kind of pseudo-spiritual--
>>REGINA: No,
because there's a lot
of that, where you just wander.
Well, I'll let spirit
tell me where to go next.
It doesn't work well.
>>ARDAGH: No, no.
Because you
mentioned your friend
you had dinner who was
not able to make a living.
>>REGINA: Then
you're purposeless.
Yeah.
>>ARDAGH: So the thing
is, when a man really
gives his gift, when a man
really is fully on target
with contributing
everything he can
to give with his relationship,
with his children,
but also with his
work, if you simply
take care of your
beliefs around money
and just wash yourself clean
of any prejudice around money
and either way, I've
experienced that money
takes care of itself.
People want to give you money
when you are making a real--
>>REGINA: When
you're showing up.
>>ARDAGH: When you're
showing up and you're
making a real contribution,
people want to give you money.
My primary income is as a coach.
I don't get paid to
run my coaching school,
because in order to
maintain quality,
we just plow it all back in.
So I get paid by my
coaching clients.
I don't have any
published fees, right?
People say, how
much do you charge?
I don't have any fee.
What do you want to pay?
And I've noticed if
I just ask people,
what do you want
to pay, we define
what the service will be,
they come up with an amount
that they choose.
And now I've created
a context where
people are deciding they want to
give me money to support them.
And that's the ideal--
>>REGINA: And it's usually
honoring proportionate
to what you bring to the table.
>>ARDAGH: Exactly.
So what I've learned
by doing that is
I've learned the world
is full of people
who want to give me
money. [CHUCKLES]
>>REGINA: There you go.
And that's a great belief.
Let's talk about Russell Brand.
Let's talk about the notion,
like we're talking about,
a lot of the kids now who
just don't want to get
involved with these
scary girls who
are out there doing
what they have to do,
because they've come to
feel that they may not have
any partnership any time soon.
And the guys aren't
picking up their part,
so now the girls
have become, maybe
you could even say overly
masculinized, quite ambitious.
And that's more of a
trend with the younger
girls, which is out
of need and necessity
and also conditioning.
Now it's a new kind
of conditioning.
So now the boys
still, they're boys.
They still have some chemicals
running through their bodies.
So let's say what
happens when you
go to either serial dating,
in other words, strangers,
or porn.
>>ARDAGH: Mm.
Well, there's a very
different biochemistry
happens with both
porn-- I mean, there's
porn that you watch passively.
But now there's also
the kind of porn
that's interactive,
where you pay some money
and you get to actually talk--
>>REGINA: And virtual
reality's coming soon.
>>ARDAGH: I don't
know about that.
I hadn't heard about
that, but there
is the porn where you
talk to somebody, right?
And then there's,
as you said, there's
dating somebody that's new.
Now, newness, any
kind of new challenge,
kicks in the dopamine,
peaks dopamine, as well as
other brain chemicals.
I'm not going to go into
the whole chemistry of it,
partly because John is
the expert on that piece.
But it means that on a new date
or in a pornographic situation
or with a prostitute,
it used to be,
a man is going to get turned
on and excited and aroused
because of the newness, right?
And so that's how it used to
work for thousands of years.
That was the main
way it would work.
A man would get excited
by getting married.
He sets a goal.
I'm going to make her my wife.
He gets the rose, he's
got everything ready.
Once he's got her
pregnant, the excitement
goes out very quickly.
And that was the
way it used to work.
Then he would start to have
affairs or go to prostitutes.
And he would lose
interest in his wife.
That was quite common.
It was to be expected.
Well, today, in the last
probably 30, 40 years,
we've seen something new,
which is men actually having
a priority of wanting to
make relationship work well,
wanting to have-- men are now
choosing monogamy as a value
rather than as a moral precept.
They're not monogamous because
their church tells them to be.
They're monogamous because
they set that as a goal
for themselves.
But now there's the challenge
of the biochemistry.
Because if a man goes
to bed with his wife,
she needs to talk for a while
to get the oxytocin going
so that she actually
starts to feel
aroused and is ready to
welcome him into her body.
Well, here's the problem.
If a man spends that time
talking about feelings together
and sharing, by the
time she's aroused,
he's also released oxytocin.
He's gone limp.
>>REGINA: All his
chemicals are gone.
>>ARDAGH: And he
can't get a hard-on.
And then he starts to
ask, what's wrong with me?
This is my wife.
I love her.
I should be
getting-- oh, my God.
What's the problem?
Now maybe he has
a secret affair,
or that accounts for the huge
sale of Viagra and Kialis--
is that what it's called?
>>REGINA: Cialis or something.
>>ARDAGH: Cialis, yeah.
OK, so he turns to
chemicals, right?
But there is another
solution, which
I think is a preferable-- I'm
going to get sued by the drug
companies, but I think it's
preferable to the chemicals,
which is if a man can
find a way-- you see,
a man gets aroused by having
a challenge to perform, OK?
We're going to get a
little graphic here,
if you don't mind.
>>REGINA: A little
graphic is OK.
It's little kind of a PG
network, but go ahead.
>>ARDAGH: OK, OK, yeah.
But we can't talk about sex
without a little bit of telling
it like it is, right?
>>REGINA: Yeah, exactly.
>>ARDAGH: So he needs to
have some kind of challenge.
The challenge that
he can bring in
is to make sex with his
partner about her pleasure
and about bringing her to
a peak of satisfaction.
>>REGINA: Which
can be challenging.
>>ARDAGH: Which can
be challenging, right?
So I'll kind of
edit this is to make
it suitable for your
audience, but there
are ways he can do that, which
actually will challenge him,
which will introduce
this element of,
am I going to make it or not?
As soon as you bring
that element back in,
that will restore the
element of testosterone.
And if he's successful-- this
is what we call in the book
it polarity sex, and it's
very graphic in the book.
If a man can be successful in
bringing a woman to orgasm,
he's going to have that feeling
of checking something off
on a box psychologically.
>>REGINA: Boo-- all the
chemicals are there.
>>ARDAGH: Like, I did it!
Yes!
I'm the guy!
I took her to the moon, right?
That means the next day or two
days later or three days later,
the next time there's
the possibility
of sexual interaction,
he's going
to walk into the situation
feeling already, I'm the guy,
I can do this.
He's going to then
have an even more
fulfilling sexual
experience with his wife,
and that's going to
build his confidence
and also increase her openness.
So that's the formula,
is polarity sex,
which is structured sex where
at least at the beginning,
there's three phases to
it described in the book.
The first phase
focuses on getting
him warmed up,
because he needs kind
a little bit of jump start.
But the main phase, the
central phase of polarity sex,
is that he focus on
her pleasure, probably
without penetration, right?
So he's actually
bringing her to orgasm.
And then only in
the third phase do
they have what we normally think
of as penetrating sex, right?
But this is after
she's had an orgasm.
So now he can really give
to her through his body,
but after she's
already peaked, right?
Now that formula will restore
the chemistry necessary
for him to feel successful.
And a man who practices in
this way-- we've tested this
out-- he actually, if he does
go back to porn or other women,
he just loses interest,
because somehow the chemistry
is restored and he feels
good about himself.
He actually starts to--
>>REGINA: He's not looking
for a quick jump in dopamine
and testosterone, serotonin.
>>ARDAGH: Exactly.
He looks forward to
intimacy with his wife,
because he knows, I can do this.
The main reason--
>>REGINA: It's an
accomplishment.
>>ARDAGH: Exactly.
The main reason I would say
that a man looks outside
of the relationship, whether
he's in a relationship or not,
the main reason a
man looks outside
is because he's lost confidence
that he can bring a woman
to peaks of fulfillment.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
I thought it was very well
laid-out out, and as you say,
it's graphic, but I
mean, it's natural.
And I was thinking about that,
and I thought, that actually
makes perfect sense.
If a man is wired
toward accomplishment,
even in sexuality there
has to be-- I mean,
if you don't know
someone, if it's
a stranger or whatever, it's
just a quick win, dominance
and then you're done.
But in a day in, day
out loving relationship,
it's been a problem
throughout history.
The polarization is gone,
and that makes perfect sense
in re-establishing it.
>>ARDAGH: Exactly.
I'd love to throw in
a little point here.
>>REGINA: Sure.
>>ARDAGH: Because you actually
humorously use the idea of PG.
Of course, we're not
in a cinema, but still,
an interesting thing, that when
we have these ratings of PG
and whatever, R and everything,
we apply it to sex, but not
to violence.
>>REGINA: Oh, I know.
It's just ridiculous.
>>ARDAGH: It's that interesting?
So actually, if we were to have
a conversation now about AK-47s
and semiautomatic weapons, we
could say anything we want,
although though things--
>>REGINA: About war
and people losing
their legs and their limbs.
>>ARDAGH: Those things actually
caused tremendous harm, right?
If we were to have a
conversation about sex
between mice, I could talk
about a female mice's clitoris,
and I could talk freely about
sex between other mammals,
and we'd be OK with it.
But we've put this
kind of taboo boundary.
We can't discuss sexuality
between human beings.
And it's kind of censored.
I mean, excuse me?
What is the logic
in that? [LAUGHING]
>>REGINA: That's quite American.
I notice in other countries they
don't have the same challenges.
>>ARDAGH: Well, I think it's
really worth questioning.
Because why would we
want to censor something
which is the gateway to feeling
fantastic, to greater love?
Oftentimes just having
great sex on its own
will solve a lot of
marital conflict.
Why would we want
to censor that,
which is like one of
the best things around,
and not censor violence?
I don't understand it.
But I think it's an
important point we raise,
because although I'm happy
to cooperate with whatever
the limits are in
a conversation,
the fact that we don't want to
talk about these things I think
actually is responsible
for the fact
that many men don't know
how to make all this work.
>>REGINA: Hear, hear.
I agree.
>>ARDAGH: Because we can't
talk about it, you see.
>>REGINA: I agree.
>>ARDAGH: I think it's
something we should really
find ways to talk about
as much as possible that's
why we wrote about in the book.
If a man can understand,
this is not so difficult.
I've just got to do this and
then do this and then touch
this and then lick that, and
then it's going to be OK.
If a man can simply understand
that, problem solved.
But the fact that we don't
want to talk about it
is actually exacerbating
the problem.
>>REGINA: I agree
with you, yeah.
It's a very repressed society
in that way and yet pervasive.
It's pervasive in a really
more unhealthy manner,
not in a real manner
between people,
between adults, between
people that love each other.
That's what's underrepresented,
is sexuality among
people, husbands,
wives, so forth.
>>ARDAGH: Well, yeah.
I mean, there's a whole
conversation we could have.
>>REGINA: That is
another conversation.
One final point
before we wrap it up,
and that has to do with the
expression of anger in men.
See, you don't have to be-- you
don't need a PG rating there.
You can talk about anger all you
want, violence, like you said.
>>ARDAGH: [LAUGHING] Yeah.
>>REGINA: But anger in
men-- when all of this
comes to a head, so
to speak, and men have
been taught now to suppress it.
You're not going to war, you're
not going to bludgeon someone.
How do women best
interface with men
when there is an
anger situation?
Because women feel quite
threatened or smaller.
So you feel threatened.
>>ARDAGH: So you're
asking how can a woman--
>>REGINA: What's going
on with the men in terms
of where is their responsibility
within this in a conscious way?
And what's the
best way for women
to interface with that anger?
>>ARDAGH: Right.
So I think the first
thing to understand
is that anger, or
violence anyway,
is the expression of an
energy gone out of control.
Anger, as we understand it,
is feeling the energy, right?
And so whether it's verbal
or physical violence,
that is usually destructive.
But the energy itself,
if we reel it back,
the energy itself is actually
a good thing for a man to have.
A man who's lost that,
[SLAPPING] [GRUNTING], feeling,
he's actually going to become
a weak man who can't accomplish
anything in his life.
He needs that feeling
of, [GRUNTING], right?
It's just a matter of
knowing how to channel it.
And that's also--
>>REGINA: And as you
say, it's pure energy.
It's raw food.
>>ARDAGH: Well, that's
to do with testosterone.
Because testosterone
is a hormone
that perceives boundaries
and just pushes through them.
It's like American football.
That's a big testosterone sport.
It's like push through
and get the goal.
And that's very much about how
the masculine psyche is wired.
And when a man is
successful at doing that,
he feels triumphant.
His teammates lift him up and
carry him around the field,
and he's ready to do
it again, you see.
So that's something
we don't want to lose.
Because a man who loses
it will lose his edge,
and he'll feel
overwhelmed by life.
He'll feel much more stressed.
>>REGINA: Defeated.
Mhm.
>>ARDAGH: So what's important
is-- but at the same time,
we don't want to be
punching people out.
We don't want to
behave inappropriately.
And above all, we
don't want a man
being violent or abusive or
threatening with his partner.
That's very destructive
to relationship.
And a woman obviously
doesn't want that, either.
So the key here is for a man,
or, actually, in a couple,
for a man and a woman to
learn the necessity for him
to withdraw.
That's the whole key.
So a man basically needs to
learn a very simple thing.
We put it right
there in the book.
We've actually
put it in italics,
like here's what to say.
When you feel that you're
kind of about to lose it,
and most men do
feel that sometimes,
is to be able to say, OK,
I've heard what you've said,
and I really need
to think it over.
You don't need to go so much
in, oh, I'm feeling really upset
right now.
Because that's not necessary.
It's just, I've heard
what you've said,
I need some time to digest.
And then withdraw.
>>REGINA: And that's
our cue to just, OK--
>>ARDAGH: Well, that's
the other piece, you see.
So for a man, he's going
to learn to say that,
and he's got to learn to say it
in a way that feel supportive.
So he doesn't want
to say, like, I've
had enough of this nonsense.
I'm out of here.
That's not supportive.
But to be able to say, OK,
you've made some good points,
and I really need some time
to withdraw and digest.
That's a positive,
supportive thing to say.
But what a woman needs to
learn is when he's stirred up,
it's not the time
to chase after him.
Because what a woman
thinks is, well, we
need to talk this through,
like don't bottle it up.
Talk it through.
That's not how he
works, you see.
When a man's stirred
up, he's getting
into this testosterone thing.
If she doesn't allow
him to take space, which
is quite a common pattern
between men and women,
he's eventually
going to explode.
So when he says, I need
to think this over,
or, I need some
time to withdraw,
for a woman, what she can
do is to honor that space
but then measure it.
If he comes back within
24 hours with a solution,
then it was successful.
If he says, I'm going to go
away and think about this
and just never mentions it
again and obviously didn't
deal with it, then they
may need some support.
And the great thing
today is we really
understand the benefit of
coaching and counseling
and marital counseling.
And so we can get
help with these things
from people who understand
how to do them effectively.
>>REGINA: We're out of time.
But the other final part on that
is when the guy does go away,
a man goes away and processes it
and comes back, the women, you
warn, should not punish
them for that withdrawal.
>>ARDAGH: Right.
Thank him.
>>REGINA: Thank him.
>>ARDAGH: Thank him for having
been responsible and used
his energy in a responsible way.
>>REGINA: Right.
All very good advice.
You did an excellent job.
As you say, there's a his
part, a her part, and so forth,
everything in between.
>>ARDAGH: The book
is for men and women
to understand the masculine
psyche and biology better
and to be able to bring
out the best in a man.
It doesn't have to look
any particular way.
The important thing is that
he feels good about himself.
>>REGINA: You bet.
Again, thank you so much.
The name of the book is
"Conscious Men," which you
can find at major booksellers.
Until next time, thank you
for joining us here on Gaia.
[THEME MUSIC]